# Project Structure
## Contents
- [Overview](#overview)
- [Infrastructure](#infrastructure)
	- [Amazon Web Services (AWS)](#amazon-web-services-aws)
	- [Terraform](#terraform)
	- [Ansible](#ansible)
	- [Linux](#linux)
- [Source Code](#source-code)
	- [Git](#git)
	- [GitHub and GitLab](#github-and-gitlab)
	- [Maven](#maven)
	- [SonarQube](#sonarqube)
	- [Nexus Repository](#nexus-repository)
	- [Jenkins](#jenkins)
	- [Trivy](#trivy)
- [Deployment](#deployment)
	- [Docker](#docker)
	- [Kubernetes](#kubernetes)
	- [AWS Elastic Kubernetes Service](#aws-elastic-kubernetes-service)
- [Monitoring](#monitoring)
	- [Blackbox Exporter](#blackbox-exporter)
	- [Prometheus](#prometheus)
	- [Grafana](#grafana)

## Overview
This document contains the details about the different components required for this project.

The project uses the following tools:
- **Infrastructure**
	- _AWS_: hosts the infrastructure resources.
	- _Terraform_: automates provisioning of infrastructure and other resources.
	- _Ansible_: prepares the host environment for deployment of other tools.
	- _Linux_: OS used for hosting the CI/CD tools.
- **Source code operations**
	- _Git_: version control system for project source code.
	- _GitHub_: remote Git repository for project source code.
	- _Maven_: building and packaging application source code.
	- _SonarQube_: scan generated builds for issues.
	- _Nexus Repository_: store different build versions generated by Maven.
	- _Jenkins_: automating Maven and other build-related operations.
	- _Trivy_: scan builds and images created from source-code for vulnerabilities.
- **Deployment**
	- _Docker_: deploy containers for CI/CD tools and create images for application builds.
	- _Kubernetes_: deploy application in cluster.
	- _AWS Elastic Kubernetes Service_: deploy application cluster hosted in AWS.
- **Monitoring**
	- _Blackbox Exporter_: probe application endpoint (website) to check response and functionality.
	- _Grafana_: plot application metrics in dashboard for visualisation.
	- _Prometheus_: record metrics about application endpoint (website) availability from Blackbox Exporter.

## Infrastructure
### Amazon Web Services (AWS)
Amazon Web Services (AWS) is used to host the following infrastructure resources required for the this project's demonstration:
- **Elastic Compute Cloud (EC2) Instances**: 
	- _Control Node_ instance: runs Ansible playbooks and creates the EKS cluster with cluster tools.
	- _Jenkins_ instance: runs Jenkins inside Docker container.
	- _Nexus Repository_ instance: runs Nexus Repository inside Docker container.
	- _SonarQube_ instance: runs SonarQube inside Docker containers.
	- _Monitoring_ instance: runs Blackbox Exporter, Grafana and Prometheus inside separate Docker containers in the same host.
	- _Cluster nodes_: automatically created by EKS configuration.
- **Security Group**: a separate Security Group is created inside the default VPC of the specified AWS Region. The SG must allow all outbound traffic and the following inbound traffic--
	- _SSH_: allow SSH traffic for manual configuration and Ansible plays.
	- _Kubernetes_: allow `kubectl` to connect with the EKS cluster.
	- _Nexus Repository_: allow storing and retrieving builds in the repository.
	- _Jenkins_: allow opening the Jenkins portal for build automation.
	- _SonarQube_: allow opening SonarQube portal for configuration and send source code for scanning.
	- _Blackbox Exporter_: allow probing target application and receiving response from application.
	- _Grafana_: allow connecting to Grafana portal for dashboard configuration and data visualisation.
	- _Prometheus_: allow storing metrics about probing application.
- **Identity and Access Management (IAM)**: for better security, the tasks can be delegated to IAM users with just enough privileges for performing them.
	- _Root User_: a Root User is necessary to have access to AWS resources, but it should be avoided as much as possible because of its highest privileges.
	- _Infrastructure Admin_: an IAM user able to provision and delete AWS infrastructure resources.
	- _Cluster Admin_: an IAM user for administrating the EKS clusters.
- **Elastic Kubernetes Service**: provides infrastrucuture for hosting the application's Kubernetes cluster in spcified AWS Region.

### Terraform
Terraform is used to automate provisioning the AWS infrastructure resources, except EKS (more details below).

The Terraform code is separated into the following modules based on the target resources:
- **EC2**: Handles creation of EC2 instances with specified configuration. Requires SSH key pair for remote access, and Security Group for external traffic.
	- _Variables_:
		- `instance_name`: name of the instance.
		- `instance_type`: type of AWS EC2 instance.
		- `root_vol_size`: size of root volume of the instance.
		- `ssh_public_key`: public SSH key used for connecting to instance.
		- `instance_sg`: AWS Security Group that the instance is connected to.
		- `user_data`: script to execute when creating the instance.
	- _Outputs_:
		- `public_ip`: public IP address of the instance.
- **IAM**: Creates an IAM user with the [minimum policies requried](https://docs.aws.amazon.com/eks/latest/eksctl/minimum-iam-policies.html) for EKS cluster administration, and an AWS Access Key.
	- _Variables_:
		- `project_prefix`: prefix used for naming AWS resources of the project.
		- `username`: unique username of the IAM user.
		- `user_path`: AWS path where the IAM user is created.
		- `display_name`: name shown in AWS Console.
		- `user_purpose`: purpose of the IAM user as shown in AWS Console.
		- `managed_policies`: preset IAM policies provided by AWS.
		- `inline_policies`: set of JSON files defining custom policies for the user.
	- _Outputs_:
		- `eks_admin_key_id`: AWS Access Key ID generated by the module.
		- `eks_admin_key_secret`: AWS Access Key secret generated by the module.
- **SecurityGroup**: Creates a Security Group inside the default VPC of the specified AWS region to connect the EC2 instances for external traffic.
	- _Varilables_:
		- `infra_region`: AWS region where the infrastructure will be created.
		- `project_prefix`: prefix used for naming AWS resources of the project.
		- `sg_name`: name of the security group.
		- `inbound_access_port`: list of ports required by the project to receive external traffic.
- **Main**: Main module takes input from the user for creating the different resources in the required sequence.
	- _Providers_:
		- `aws`: for provisioning AWS resources.
		- `tls`: for creating SSH key pair locally.
		- `local`: for creating and reading files locally.

### Ansible
Ansible is used to automate preparing the EC2 instances for running the tools required. The playbooks use the inventory named `inventory.ini` for managed nodes and certain variables.

The playbooks are listed below:
- `01_InstallDocker.yaml`: installs Docker, starts the `systemd` service and adds the Ansible user to the Docker group.
- `02_RunDockerContainers.yaml`: runs the Docker containers for Jenkins, Nexus Repository and SonarQube.
- `03_ConfigureJenkinsContainer.yaml`: installs plugins and other additional tools in the Jenkins container.
- `04_InstallClusterTools.yaml`: installs AWS CLI v2, Eksctl and `kubectl` for EKS cluster administration.
- `05_RetrieveInitialPasswords.yaml`: retrieves the initial admin passwords for Jenkins and Nexus Repository from their respective containers.
- `06_RunMonitoringContainers.yaml`: runs the Docker containers for Blackbox Exporter, Grafana and Prometheus.

### Linux
The operating system used in the EC2 instances is Ubuntu, a Linux distribution. It's also used to develop and run this project, but it's not mandatory for those cases.

## Source Code
The source code of the application is acquired from [Boardgame](https://github.com/jaiswaladi246/Boardgame) project by [Aditya Jaiswal](https://github.com/jaiswaladi246). See that project's page for more details about the application.

No modifications were made to the application source code. However, few changes were made in regards of deployment, to suit the context of this project.

### Git
Git is used as the version control system of this project, managing different changes and branches.

### GitHub and GitLab
GitHub and GitLab are cloud platforms used to store this project's data and versioning online.

### Maven
Maven is used to compile, build and package the application source code.

Maven is run through Jenkins in dedicated stages for build automation.

### SonarQube
SonarQube scans the application source code for issues and vulnerabilities.

SonarQube is running in a Docker container hosted by an EC2 instance.

The scan is invoked through a Jenkins build stage.

### Nexus Repository
All the different version of the Maven builds can be stored in the Nexus repository, which is running in a Docker container hosted in an EC2 instance.

### Jenkins
Jenkins is the build-automation tool used for fetching, compiling, building, analyzing, pushing and deploying the application starting from its source code.

### Trivy
Trivy is used for scanning the file-system, packaged Maven build and the deployable Docker image of the application, for issues and vulnerabilities. It's installed in the Jenkins container to be run in dedicated stages of the build.

## Deployment
The application source code is compiled and built into a Docker image that can be deployed in a Kubernetes cluster, which is hosted by AWS EKS infrastructure.

### Docker
Docker is the containeristation tool used in this project for the following purpose:
- Run Jenkins, Nexus Repository, SonarQube in respective containers for build operations.
- Build the Docker image of the compiled application build and store in Docker Hub.
- Run Blackbox Exporter, Grafana and Prometheus for monitoring deployed application.

### Kubernetes
Kubernetes is the container orchestration tool used to deploy the application's Docker image in a cluster for external access online.

The Control Node EC2 instance uses `kubectl` with `eksctl` and AWS CLI to manage and get information about the application cluster from the AWS EKS cluster. This can also be done in any machine of your choice if those tools are installed and configured as such.

The `kubectl` installation in Jenkins is used to deploy the application builds to the AWS EKS cluster.

### AWS Elastic Kubernetes Service
AWS EKS provides the infrastructure to host and manage external access of the application's Kubernetes cluster.

It creates all the infrastructure resources (EC2 instances as nodes, networking, load balancers and elastic IP addresses) necessary to create a fully functioning application accessible online through an endpoint.

## Monitoring
The monitoring tools used in this project are Blackbox Exporter, Grafana and Prometheus. They run in separate Docker containers hosted in the same EC2 instance, connected by a Docker network and a mounted volume for storing logging data.

The Ansible playbook "`06_RunMonitoringContainers.yaml`" contains all the configurations used for their respective Docker containers.

### Blackbox Exporter
Blackbox Exporter probes the application endpoint and checks if it's responding and functional. The data gathered can be accessed through port 9115 of the public IP address of the EC2 instance hosting Blackbox.

### Prometheus
Prometheus gathers the data from Blackbox Exporter and logs them in a database, which is accessible through the port 9090 of it's host EC2 instance.

### Grafana
Grafana is used for visualising the data from Prometheus using a pre-built dashboard.

Visualisation is available after signing in at port 3000 of the hosting EC2 instance.

The preset Prometheus dashboard is available from the [Grafana dashboard catalogue](https://grafana.com/grafana/dashboards/).